---
title: My index
subtitle: >
 The value of digital data: enhancing citizens' awareness and voice about surveillance capitalism
---

Big data is the ‘fuel’ of the contemporary digital economy. The leaders of the digital economy are companies structured as platforms (e.g. Google), which, on the one hand, intermediate relations among different groups of actors (consumers, advertisers, etc.), while, on the other hand, extract data from these very users, as well as their interactions. Platforms control over data goes well beyond the digital boundaries of the corporate platform, extending to the open Web (e.g. through share buttons), mobile phones (e.g. App Store), households (e.g. Alexa) and public institutions (e.g. partnership between the UK National Health System (NHS) and Google).

This new form of economic and socio-technical organization is defined as **surveillance capitalism**. The term does not refer specifically to digital technologies of social monitoring, rather to an emergent economic logic based on a unilateral extraction of digital data from citizens, which are used to perfecting algorithms, investing in the profitable market of artificial intelligence, and selling prediction products to companies that need to profile users.

Despite the pervasiveness and currency of the phenomenon, we still know very little about it, since empirical research in this field is scarce, especially in Italy. In particular, we know little about citizens’ awareness and opinions on how and to which aims digital data are extracted and exploited, and the economic value they produce. The lack of attention towards citizens’ understandings reflects the asymmetries of power and information/knowledge that are exploited by surveillance capitalism. In fact, whereas platforms have a granular knowledge on users’ personal life, they are designed not to be transparent, for example regarding the kind of third parties to which data are sold as well as their scopes. These asymmetries tend to disadvantage especially the most vulnerable social groups that are also at risk of being affected by social exclusion and discrimination emerging from data mining and the increasing use of digital data by private and public organisations (consider, for example individuals with lower digital literacy, such as older people). In general, users’ understandings and opinions on these dynamics are rarely taken into consideration by platforms.

The Italian scientific and public debate on these topics is mostly focused on privacy. Questions of data protection are of great concern, since privacy is a human right connected to human dignity. Nevertheless, issues related to value appropriation are equally important, since digital data generated by citizens through their online activities produce a conspicuous economic value that is extracted from the social but not redistributed within the social.

Building on the understanding of these challenges, V-DATA project seeks to contribute to building a more balanced relation between citizens and surveillance capitalism processes, as well as the actors that govern them. Specifically, on the one hand it seeks to filling the knowledge gap about Italian public opinion on dynamics and logics of surveillance capitalism, as well as on the risks of inequality and discrimination related to surveillance capitalism in Italy. On the other hand, it seeks to raise the public awareness on these issues, thus potentially enhancing citizens’ ability to questioning these processes. 
